 
 
 
 Drug-tolerant persisters to TRAIL emerge from a dose-dependent surface in a cell-state continuum of sensitivity | npj Systems Biology and Applications 
 
 



 

 

 
 
 
 





 



 
 
 
 
 
 




 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 



 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 






 
 

 

 













 


 
 
 

 





 
 




 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 






 
 

 
 Skip to main content 



 
 
 
 Thank you for visiting nature.com. You are using a browser version with limited support for CSS. To obtain
 the best experience, we recommend you use a more up to date browser (or turn off compatibility mode in
 Internet Explorer). In the meantime, to ensure continued support, we are displaying the site without styles
 and JavaScript. 

 
 

 

 

 
 
 

 
 
 Advertisement 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 View all journals 
 
 
 
 
 
 Saved research 
 
 
 
 
 
 Search 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Account 
 
 
 Log in 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Content 
 Explore content 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 About the journal 
 
 
 
 
 
 Publish with us 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Sign up for alerts 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 RSS feed 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 




 
 
 



 
 
 
 
 
 
 nature 
 
 
 
 npj systems biology and applications 
 
 
 
 articles 
 
 
 
 
 article 
 
 
 
 

 


 





 
 
 
 
 
 
 Drug-tolerant persisters to TRAIL emerge from a dose-dependent surface in a cell-state continuum of sensitivity
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Download PDF 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Download PDF 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Article 
 
 
 Open access 
 
 
 

 Published: 13 July 2026 
 

 Drug-tolerant persisters to TRAIL emerge from a dose-dependent surface in a cell-state continuum of sensitivity 
 Giada Fiandaca 1   nAff4 , Marielle Péré 1 , 2 , Kelian Bonhomme 1 , 2 , Madalena Chaves 1 , 3 & … Jérémie Roux 1 , 2 , 3   Show authors 

 

 
 npj Systems Biology and Applications 
 ( 2026 ) Cite this article 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Save article 
 
 
 
 
 View saved research 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 1310 Accesses 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Metrics details 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 We’re sharing this article early to provide faster access to peer-reviewed, accepted research. It is citable and carries a permanent DOI. This version is subject to further edits and will be replaced automatically by the final Version of Record. All legal disclaimers apply.
 
 

 
 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 Abstract Clonal cancer cells show heterogeneous responses to cytotoxic drugs, raising the question of whether this variability reflects discrete phenotypes or a continuum of underlying cell states. We address this by quantifying single-cell caspase-8 activation dynamics after TRAIL treatment and developing an extended mechanistic model of the extrinsic apoptosis pathway that incorporates c-FLIP-mediated control of initiator caspase activation. Fitting this model to individual trajectories across multiple doses recovers cell-specific procaspase-8 and c-FLIP abundances, together with three kinetic parameters, and reproduces the full diversity of observed responses. Embedding these inferred parameters into a shared state space reveals that sensitive and tolerant outcomes do not correspond to discrete subpopulations. Instead, a single biochemical pathway generates a continuous distribution of cell states whose position at treatment determines fate. Linking each trajectory to its early activation rate identifies a dose-dependent hyperplane that partitions this landscape into apoptotic and tolerant regions. Increasing drug dose translates this decision surface predictably, altering the outcome only for cells positioned near the boundary. This geometric perspective explains fractional killing in clonal populations and shows how drug-tolerant persister cells can arise from reversible variation in cell state. It further suggests that shifting state-space distributions relative to the decision surface may offer new strategies to limit persistence. 
 
 


 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 Similar content being viewed by others 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Two-level modeling approach to identify the regulatory dynamics capturing drug response heterogeneity in single-cells
 
 
 
 Article 
 Open access 
 21 October 2021 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Drug tolerant persister cell plasticity in cancer: a revolutionary strategy for more effective anticancer therapies
 
 
 
 Article 
 Open access 
 14 August 2024 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Cancer drug-tolerant persister cells: from biological questions to clinical opportunities
 
 
 
 Article 
 
 02 September 2024 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Explore related subjects 
 Discover the latest articles and news in related subjects. 
 
 
 
 
 Cancer 
 
 
 
 
 Computational biology and bioinformatics 
 
 
 
 
 

 

 
 
 
 

 
 Acknowledgements This work was supported by the French Government (National Research Agency: Agence Nationale de la Recherche “Investissements d’Avenir” program) through the programs LABEX SIGNALIFE ANR-11-LABX-0028-01 (to M.C. and J.R.) and IDEX UCAJedi ANR-15-IDEX-01 (to J.R.), and “IHU RespirERA” France 2030 program ANR-23-IAHU-007 (to M.C. and J.R.). It was partly supported by research funding from the Canceropôle Provence-Alpes-Côte d’Azur, Institut National du Cancer (INCa) and Région Sud, a Programme Prématuration from CNRS Innovation and from Canceropôle PACA, EmA from Canceropôle PACA to (J.R.). This work was also funded by an ITMO Cancer of Aviesan within the framework of the 2021-2030 Cancer Control Strategy (MIC proposal Cellema, 22CM045-00), on funds administered by Inserm to M.C. and J.R. Author information Author notes Giada Fiandaca Present address: Inria, COMPO Team, Cancer Research Center of Marseille, Institut Paoli-Calmettes, Inserm UMR1068, CNRS UMR7258, Aix Marseille University UM105, Marseille, France Authors and Affiliations Inria, INRAE, CNRS, MACBES Team, Université Côte d’Azur, Valbonne, France Giada Fiandaca, Marielle Péré, Kelian Bonhomme, Madalena Chaves & Jérémie Roux Institut de Pharmacologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire (IPMC, CNRS UMR 7275, Inserm 1323), Université Côte d’Azur, Valbonne, France Marielle Péré, Kelian Bonhomme & Jérémie Roux Institut Hospitalo-Universitaire (IHU) RespirERA, Nice, France Madalena Chaves & Jérémie Roux Authors Giada Fiandaca View author publications Search author on: PubMed   Google Scholar Marielle Péré View author publications Search author on: PubMed   Google Scholar Kelian Bonhomme View author publications Search author on: PubMed   Google Scholar Madalena Chaves View author publications Search author on: PubMed   Google Scholar Jérémie Roux View author publications Search author on: PubMed   Google Scholar Corresponding authors Correspondence to
 Madalena Chaves or Jérémie Roux . Ethics declarations 
 
 Competing interests 
 The authors declare no competing interests. 
 
 Additional information Publisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations. Supplementary information Supplementary Information (download PDF ) Figures Code Data R2 (download ZIP ) Rights and permissions 
 Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence, and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this article are included in the article’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this licence, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/ . 
 Reprints and permissions About this article Cite this article Fiandaca, G., Péré, M., Bonhomme, K. et al. Drug-tolerant persisters to TRAIL emerge from a dose-dependent surface in a cell-state continuum of sensitivity.
 npj Syst Biol Appl (2026). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41540-026-00782-4 Download citation Received : 08 December 2025 Accepted : 27 June 2026 Published : 13 July 2026 DOI : https://doi.org/10.1038/s41540-026-00782-4 Share this article Anyone you share the following link with will be able to read this content: Get shareable link Sorry, a shareable link is not currently available for this article. Copy shareable link to clipboard 
 Provided by the Springer Nature SharedIt content-sharing initiative
 
 

 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 Download PDF 
 
 
 
 

 
 



 

 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 Advertisement 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 




 
 
 
 Explore content 
 
 
 
 
 
 Research articles
 
 
 
 
 
 Reviews & Analysis
 
 
 
 
 
 News & Comment
 
 
 
 
 
 Collections
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Follow us on X
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Sign up for alerts 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 RSS feed 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 About the journal 
 
 
 
 
 Aims & Scope
 
 
 
 
 
 Content types
 
 
 
 
 
 Journal Information
 
 
 
 
 
 About the Editors
 
 
 
 
 
 Contact
 
 
 
 
 
 Open Access
 
 
 
 
 
 Calls for Papers
 
 
 
 
 
 Article Processing Charges
 
 
 
 
 
 Editorial policies
 
 
 
 
 
 Journal Metrics
 
 
 
 
 
 About the Partner
 
 
 
 
 
 Meet the Editor-in-Chief
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 Publish with us 
 
 
 
 
 For Authors and Referees
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Language editing services
 
 
 
 
 
 Open access funding 
 
 
 
 
 Submit manuscript 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


 
 
 Search 
 
 Search articles by subject, keyword or author 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Show results from 
 
 
 
 All journals 
 This journal 
 
 
 
 
 
 Search 
 
 

 
 

 
 
 Advanced search
 
 

 Quick links 
 
 Explore articles by subject 
 Find a job 
 Guide to authors 
 Editorial policies 
 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 npj Systems Biology and Applications
 
 ( npj Syst Biol Appl )
 
 
 
 
 ISSN 2056-7189 (online)
 
 

 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 nature.com footer links 
 
 
 
 About Nature Portfolio 
 
 About us 
 Press releases 
 Press office 
 Contact us 
 
 

 
 Discover content 
 
 Journals A-Z 
 Articles by subject 
 protocols.io 
 Nature Index 
 
 

 
 Publishing policies 
 
 Nature portfolio policies 
 Open access 
 
 

 
 Author & Researcher services 
 
 Reprints & permissions 
 Research data 
 Language editing 
 Scientific editing 
 Nature Masterclasses 
 Research Solutions 
 
 

 
 Libraries & institutions 
 
 Librarian service & tools 
 Librarian portal 
 Open research 
 Recommend to library 
 
 

 
 Advertising & partnerships 
 
 Advertising 
 Partnerships & Services 
 Media kits 
 
 Branded
 content 
 
 

 
 Professional development 
 
 Nature Awards 
 Nature Careers 
 Nature 
 Conferences 
 
 

 
 Regional websites 
 
 Nature Africa 
 Nature China 
 Nature India 
 Nature Japan 
 Nature Middle East 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 Privacy
 Policy 
 Use
 of cookies 
 
 Your privacy choices/Manage cookies
 
 
 Legal
 notice 
 Accessibility
 statement 
 Terms & Conditions 
 Your US state privacy rights 
 
 
 
 


 
 
 
 
 © 2026 Springer Nature Limited 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 



 

 

 

 
 

 
 
 
 
 Close banner 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Close 
 
 


 

 
 
 
 Sign up for the Nature Briefing: Cancer newsletter — what matters in cancer research, free to your inbox weekly. 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 Email address 

 
 
 
 
 Sign up 
 

 
 
 I agree my information will be processed in accordance with the Nature and Springer Nature Limited Privacy Policy . 
 
 
 
 

 

 

 
 

 
 
 
 
 Close banner 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Close 
 
 


 
 Get what matters in cancer research, free to your inbox weekly. 
 Sign up for Nature Briefing: Cancer
 
 

 

 






 
 